A technique for rapid assessment of habitat structural composition:

We will visit an area of woodland by Derwent Water in order to carry out and evaluate methods for rapid habitat assessment.

Tandy’s Isovist technique (Westmacott and Worthington, 1994) visually estimates land cover within a defined visual horizon. 

•	First, a visual horizon needs to be defined. We will use square sampling plots with a 20 x 20 m coverage (this can be adjusted) according to field conditions. To delineate each sampling plot, use a measuring tape to establish a distance of 20 m from the forest edge. 
•	Then measure the same distance running a second measuring tape along this 20 m mark, perpendicular to the first tape to form a “+” shape. Use this to establish the visual horizon to be assessed (you can use group members to form a square or sampling “quadrat”). 
•	Within each sampling plot record the land cover of different vegetation structures according to the Domin scale:
The Domin scale is a system devised by K. Domin for describing the cover of a species in a vegetation community. The scale ranges from simple presence through 10 grades of linked cover-abundance measures: Domin values = 1: < 4% cover with few individuals; 2: < 4% with several individuals; 3: < 4% with many individuals; 4: 4-10 %; 5: 11-25 %; 6: 26-33 %; 7: 34-50 %; 8: 51-75 %; 9: 76-90 %; 10: 91-100 % cover
You will also record the number of leaf shapes that you can identify within your quadrats. And the number of trees within the DBH (diameter at breast height) classes listed in the table below. 
